Schema-Manager
==============

A Schema Manager instance helps you with the abstraction of the
generation of SQL assets such as Tables, Sequences, Foreign Keys
and Indexes.

To retrieve the ``SchemaManager`` for your connection you can use
the ``getSchemaManager()`` method:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $sm = $conn->getSchemaManager();

Now with the ``SchemaManager`` instance in ``$sm`` you can use the
available methods to learn about your database schema:

.. note::

    Parameters containing identifiers passed to the SchemaManager
    methods are *NOT* quoted automatically! Identifier quoting is
    really difficult to do manually in a consistent way across
    different databases. You have to manually quote the identifiers
    when you accept data from user- or other sources not under your
    control.

listDatabases()
---------------

Retrieve an array of databases on the configured connection:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $databases = $sm->listDatabases();

listSequences()
-------------------------------

Retrieve an array of ``Doctrine\DBAL\Schema\Sequence`` instances
that exist for a database:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $sequences = $sm->listSequences();

Or if you want to manually specify a database name:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $sequences = $sm->listSequences('dbname');

Now you can loop over the array inspecting each sequence object:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    foreach ($sequences as $sequence) {
        echo $sequence->getName() . "\n";
    }

listTableColumns()
----------------------------

Retrieve an array of ``Doctrine\DBAL\Schema\Column`` instances that
exist for the given table:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $columns = $sm->listTableColumns('user');

Now you can loop over the array inspecting each column object:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    foreach ($columns as $column) {
        echo $column->getName() . ': ' . $column->getType() . "\n";
    }

listTableDetails()
----------------------------

Retrieve a single ``Doctrine\DBAL\Schema\Table`` instance that
encapsulates all the details of the given table:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $table = $sm->listTableDetails('user');

Now you can call methods on the table to manipulate the in memory
schema for that table. For example we can add a new column:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $table->addColumn('email_address', 'string');

listTableForeignKeys()
--------------------------------

Retrieve an array of ``Doctrine\DBAL\Schema\ForeignKeyConstraint``
instances that exist for the given table:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $foreignKeys = $sm->listTableForeignKeys('user');

Now you can loop over the array inspecting each foreign key
object:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    foreach ($foreignKeys as $foreignKey) {
        echo $foreignKey->getName() . ': ' . $foreignKey->getLocalTableName() ."\n";
    }

listTableIndexes()
----------------------------

Retrieve an array of ``Doctrine\DBAL\Schema\Index`` instances that
exist for the given table:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $indexes = $sm->listTableIndexes('user');

Now you can loop over the array inspecting each index object:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    foreach ($indexes as $index) {
        echo $index->getName() . ': ' . ($index->isUnique() ? 'unique' : 'not unique') . "\n";
    }

listTables()
------------

Retrieve an array of ``Doctrine\DBAL\Schema\Table`` instances that
exist in the connections database:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $tables = $sm->listTables();

Each ``Doctrine\DBAl\Schema\Table`` instance is populated with
information provided by all the above methods. So it encapsulates
an array of ``Doctrine\DBAL\Schema\Column`` instances that can be
retrieved with the ``getColumns()`` method:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    foreach ($tables as $table) {
        echo $table->getName() . " columns:\n\n";
        foreach ($table->getColumns() as $column) {
            echo ' - ' . $column->getName() . "\n";
        }
    }

listViews()
-----------

Retrieve an array of ``Doctrine\DBAL\Schema\View`` instances that
exist in the connections database:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $views = $sm->listViews();

Now you can loop over the array inspecting each view object:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    foreach ($views as $view) {
        echo $view->getName() . ': ' . $view->getSql() . "\n";
    }

createSchema()
--------------

For a complete representation of the current database you can use
the ``createSchema()`` method which returns an instance of
``Doctrine\DBAL\Schema\Schema``, which you can use in conjunction
with the SchemaTool or Schema Comparator.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $fromSchema = $sm->createSchema();

Now we can clone the ``$fromSchema`` to ``$toSchema`` and drop a
table:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $toSchema = clone $fromSchema;
    $toSchema->dropTable('user');

Now we can compare the two schema instances in order to calculate
the differences between them and return the SQL required to make
the changes on the database:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $sql = $fromSchema->getMigrateToSql($toSchema, $conn->getDatabasePlatform());

The ``$sql`` array should give you a SQL query to drop the user
table:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    print_r($sql);

    /*
    array(
      0 => 'DROP TABLE user'
    )
    */

